Yeah, we're picking up on it. This is January 27, I
believe, Wednesday, and in the living room on 1016
Guadalupe and College Station, talking to Bill
Lay, and now going to stop and see if the machine is
working. Bill, as a starter, to introduce you to
any reader or listener in the future would you give
a brief biographical summary up to the point that
you go to work for A&M where did you grow up high
school college other experience before you came
to work at A&M actually I guess we call Valley Mills
Texas home that's where my grandparents both
lived and where I was born. I lived there until
about we were so about six years. I was about six
years old, about 1936. And my dad took a job at that
time, which was right in the middle of depression.
And Gatesville, Texas working with state
training school over there was a school for boys
which had had a game. So he worked over there taught
paper hanging and painting to the boys and help
with some of the maintenance there. And then about
19 41, he quit that job and we moved to Pasadena,
Texas, which was a long way from Gatesville,
Texas. I spent the remainder of my youth in
Pasadena and graduated from Pasadena High School
in 1949. And at that time, one of my Actually, one of
our former landlords was a strong Aggie
supporter, and he'd always encourage me to come to
Texas A&M, and I enrolled at Texas A&M in 1949 at
what was then called the Annex, which is the old
Bryan Air Force Base, which is now called
Riverside Campus. As many of you will know, the A&M
system used that for freshmen for four years, I
believe. We were the last class there and it was
rather spartan existence. I can remember my
mother telling me about that she dropped me off at
this tar paper buildings that they had out there at
that time, turned the corner and was crying all the
way home that she had left me in such an ungodly
place as this. But we survived the annex and I came
back onto the campus the next year and I graduated
from Texas A&M in 1954. At that time, I took ROTC
while I was at A&M. At that time, there were not
enough commissions for everyone. So they gave me a
National Guard assignment and said I could come on
duty, active duty, if I wanted to as a sergeant, I
believe, in the National Guard. And I told them no
thank you at that time. So I went back and taught a
year at school and then passed it in Texas. And
sometime during the year, they found some
commission, a commission in the National Guard
for me as a second lieutenant, and then called me to
active duty in 1954 in the summer. And of all places
to send me, they sent me back to Bryan Air Force
Base. And I thought I was going to begin and end my
career at Bryan Air Force Base. Sometime again by
the end of the summer I think they found some not
regular commission but reserve commissions and I
was given a reserve commission in the Air Force as a
second lieutenant and we stayed here until 1958
when they closed the base. In the meantime I had met
a young lady and got married and we had a child while
I was still stationed here and we went from here to
England, spent three years in England, came back
and spent about two years in San Antonio at the
Security Service headquarters. And I was not
particularly enamored with being in the Air
Force, although I had a good career. But I heard
President Kennedy at that time say, that's not
what your country can do for you, but what you can do
for your country. And I felt I would be better off in
the public school, so I resigned my commission,
which was a regular commission at that time, and a
captaincy in the Air Force, and went back to
teaching school in Pasadena, of all places. They
had asked me to come back there, and I thought I was
going to starve to death for a few years, but
eventually we got on our feet, and I I began to take
courses in school administration, and I took some
work at the University of Texas during the summer
of 1963,
which was an intern-type program they had for
prospective administrators. And went back and
taught a couple of years after that, and then went
full-time to the University of Texas in 1965 and
finished up a master's and doctorate there. I was
working for the Austin Public Schools during that
period of time, working as an assistant
principal, a principal, and a dean of men at three
different times. And when I finished my
doctorate, the Austin Public Schools didn't at
that time have a specific position in
administration for me other than an assistant
principal. And I'd had enough of being an
assistant principal. and I called my friend Ed
Cooper who I had seen in the issues of Aggieland was
working here at the university and although we
hadn't been in contact with each other for quite
some time you know Aggies and Aggies in the band
especially maintain some kind of relationship
and I called him and asked him if he knew of any
positions in school administration department
or the in the school administration department
here, they might be open, thinking I might get a
teaching job or something like this. And he said
no, but he was director of admissions, and he was
going to work for Dr. Williams, and his position
was open. I wanted to come and interview for him.
Well, at that time I didn't know what the Director
of Admissions was, did, or anything else, but it
was a chance for a job and it was a Texan A&M, so I
said, sure, I'll come over and talk to him about it,
having no idea what to expect or anything else. And
I came over and interviewed with Dean Heaton and
probably some other members of his staff, and I'm
not really sure who I did talk to. When was that?
This was in 1971. Spring, fall? In the spring of 71.
And I interviewed, had a nice visit, went back
home, and I thought, well, that's the last of that.
Went ahead and carried on with the business at
Crockett High School where I was employed. And
probably two weeks later, I got another call from
someone, and I'm not sure whether it was Dean
Heaton or others from Ed, asked if I'd come back
over for another interview. Well, I thought,
well, they've narrowed it down to two or three
people, and they want to do some more
interviewing. So I jumped in the car and came back
over here, and I think it was probably a Saturday
morning, although I'm not sure what day of the week
it was. And after talking a little while, he says,
would you like to, Dr. Byers would like to talk to
you. Vice President Hurst. Vice President, or he
wasn't pro, he was Vice President Horst Byers, I
believe. And I says, yes. So I went in and talked to
Dr. Byers, and he says, well, we'd like to offer you
a job. And I swallowed kind of hard because I hadn't
even thought about it. And we talked a little bit
more, and the terms were certainly better than
what I was making, and it was kind of what I was
hoping to make as far as any move that we were
looking at and I immediately called my wife and
told her to start packing the bags that we were
coming over here and that's kind of the way I got
here. I started in June of 1971.
What was that opening salary? Opening salary
I want to say it's 17-5. I think that's what it was.
And this is 60, I mean 71. 1971. And the enrollment,
though, I never forget. The enrollment was, give
or take a few, 14,700. I do remember that. That's
where we started. Okay. Describe the staff of
admissions and records at that time. Who were the
key people? Where were you located and so forth?
Right now, that seems like ancient history, but
I'll do my best. At that time, the office was
located in the Koch building. We were on the second
floor.
The admissions part was on the second floor, to put
it differently. And the other half was occupied by
the graduate college, I believe, and the vice
president, I think, as I recall. We had the, I guess
it's the north half. The registrar's part was
directly under us at that time. In underground, in
the basement. And on the basement, that's
correct. Dean Heaton was the dean. Ray Perryman
was an associate dean. Bob Lacy was the registrar.
I think Don was there at that time. Don Carter. Don
Carter was there at that time, I believe. Carolyn
Mitchell was in the admissions office. Leona Dean
was in the admissions office. Carolyn, Ms.
Mitchell took care of the transfer student area.
Ms. Dean was taking care of the graduate admission
area. And
Homer Smith was taking care of the undergraduate
area. Describe those people as professional
associates, beginning with Mr. Heaton. Tell me
about Lloyd
Heaton. The thing I regret most about Mr. Heaton,
knowing Mr. Heaton, was the fact that I didn't know
him very long. Mr. Heaton retired several years
after I got there. And I didn't work as closely with
Mr. Heaton as I would have if I had been there over a
period of time because we were working like crazy
trying to keep up. Mr. Heaton was very precise, as I
recall, very nice to me as far as I was concerned.
I'll always have a fond spot in my heart for him for
hiring me to the job, which I really thought I
couldn't do any better anywhere. It turned out, I
think, that was true. I certainly enjoyed my
relationship there at all times.
It's hard to remember a whole lot about Mr. Heaton
because I just didn't work with him that long. Do
you remember his key likes and dislikes? Not
really. I really don't. That part I didn't get to
know about. I knew he was very precise, I think. He
was, I think, had an extremely high moral
character.
But he believed in, he believed in very strongly,
I think. knowing a lot of the little intricacies
about how he did things and I really don't remember
those things it's been too long. What about then
Perryman? Ray uh what was his responsibility and
his way of doing it? Ray was his assistant
registrar I think and at that time as I recall he I
know he had charge of the graduation part of it I'm
sure he had charge of the certain reviews of
certain records and keeping the records and
things like this, again, didn't associate with
Ray very much at all. Again, he retired three or
four years after I got there as well. And as you
know, like I say, during that time admissions was
just booming. When I walked in, there were, we had
papers stacked all over the place. And because
everything was done by hand, we, applications
came in, piece by piece. We were getting more
applications than we could handle. At that time,
we still admitted everybody who qualified. We
enrolled everybody who showed up at the door, so to
speak. But the handling of the applications, we
had very little
electronic equipment to handle it, as I recall. It
used to be that the problem was trying to get all the
pieces of record together so that you could review
an application. I never forget down in the
basement itself. I think the number was 62, but I
could be off. We had 62 four drawer filing cabinets
down in the basement, which contained the records
of applicants. Those are who people who had been
here. Could we still kept the the paper file for
years afterwards, which get that they knew just
huge area down in the basement where he kept
records and everything. Now this and these files
were both those who had been admitted and those who
had not been admitted. Yes, actually those and
those who had enrolled too we kept those for a
period of time. We kept those who had applied and
didn't get admitted for a period of time and we
eventually destroyed them. But once they were had
applied and been admitted then we kept those
records as I recall forever. We eventually got
into the process of microfilming and it cut down on
the the space that we needed and it made it much
easier to find as far as that goes. We had a pretty
good paper mill going there. Your staff as
Director of Admissions, at that point, who were
the people that worked directly with you? He
actually came in as Director of Admissions. Homer
Smith was in charge of Undergraduate Admissions.
Carolyn Mitchell, the Transfer Admissions, and
Louina Dean in Graduate Admissions. What's
Dean's first name? Leona. Leona, spell it. L-A,
capital U-N-A. And she and Ms. Mitchell had been
there for a long time.
many stories about Carolyn Mitchell and her
operation there, but she
was very good at what she did. She knew how to do it
and she was very fair with everyone in that sense.
Can you share some of those stories? Probably not.
But she, I think we used to, Ms. Mitchell She tried
to keep everything in order, and she was working,
doing a number of jobs. Ms. Mitchell took care of
the transfer admissions. She took care of the
certifying of athletes, and there were one or two
other jobs that she had that when she retired, we
hired probably three other people to replace her.
But Ms. Mitchell, when the applicants came in, she
would be, not only did she do the admission of the
athletes, She also did the evaluation of the
transfer work, which in itself is a job, which now
is split out. The admissions part is handled for
one thing, and then we have another complete
section handling the evaluation of the credit
that's being transferred now. But she would
always, when she'd be working on things, when
things would be ready, it would go to the bottom of
the pile, and she would work her way down. Stuff
didn't get on the top of the pile. I always was
amazed at how she kept things in order, you know. Or
she was working on three different things. She'd
work a while on this and she'd work a while on
something else. I will share one thing with you. I
don't think she would mind hearing this. In
certifying the athletes, because it was just as
much a problem then as it is now, if not more in the
sense that you didn't have as much... much help and
he didn't have as good a way of keeping track of
things as we do now. But I do remember she said that
in Ed Hargett's case that she cheated on Ed Hargett
in reporting She says, Ed Hargett had a 4.01
because of the fact at that time we gave credit for
PE, but no hours. And therefore, you can have
better than a 4.0. And she said she knew nobody
believed he had a 4.01, so she just rounded it to a
4.0. Oh, now that's a good story. Because I had Ed in
class, and I remember what a good student he was in
my history class. All right, when you began, did
anybody give you advice and counsel in how to do the
task? What guidance, what advice did you get to
begin?
I'm sure that I was given some. It's hard to
remember right now. I do remember that
the
person who was in charge of the freshman
admissions had some leave coming and my coming
there coincided with the amount of leave he had to
take before he was going to retire or to leave the
university. And soon after I got there with a brief
amount of instructions, he took his leave and I was
in charge at that time. and didn't have the person
in charge of the freshman admissions and I was
trying to hire a person to be in charge of the
freshman admissions during the summer while I was
trying to learn the job and we were trying to keep
applications flowing at that time. So it got
really hectic that first summer. Did anybody tell
you any absolute do's and don'ts?
It's hard to learn. I'm sure we were given
instructions, guidance as to what the admission
criteria was and I'm sure that we went by that.
I don't recall
being given instruction as particular ways of
having to do things. Actually, I was trying to
learn the process of doing things, which is what I
was trying to do. Trying to learn how to check to see
the student had the proper admission. Trying to,
I'm sure at that time, although I don't remember
the specifics, dealing with concerns of people
who wanted to get their students admitted and
those kinds of procedures. Other than the fact
that it was a whirl of paper and that I was trying to
hire a new assistant director of admissions, it's
kind of a blur as to what happened at that time. In
those early years, for you early years, an
application included a transcript
And what else? The high school, they had to furnish
us a transcript which would reflect certain
credits which they had to have for admission. And
then we based it on a... Was there any other pieces
of paper? A standardized test, an SAT or the ACT. We
were already requiring that of all? As I recall,
there was a minimum that you had to have. I'd have to
go back and check it. quite some time, but I was
thinking that we had to have the high school
graduate a certain score on the SAT and a certain
class rank on that. You don't remember what those
were? I really don't remember what they were. I
know we increased it in probably,
Dr. Williams was there in 1976. That sounded like a
good year. Because I remember that in questioning
the
testing office, they'd come up with a cut-off
figure, as I recall, and they'd made certain
studies on what levels they thought were
appropriate and what weren't. I think that it was
800 in the top half, I'm not sure on the thing. 900 in
the third quarter and 1,000 in the fourth. That was
a criteria at some time, and I think that's when we
came in in 1971. That's what we used. Give me some
examples of disappointed applicants or
disappointed parents of applicants. What were
some of the experiences you had?
Any time. about admissions. There had to be phone
calls, letters. Oh, gosh, there's, I'm sure there
are literally hundreds of them. It's easier,
you're
going to interview Ed, so I'll let you talk to Ed
about one of his experiences about the big,
plumber or pipe fitter or whoever it was that
wanted to talk to Cooper. But most of the time,
we tried to deal with the students from the
standpoint of that we're not denying you
admission to Texas A&M. We're trying to provide
you a way to be a graduate of Texas A&M. And in
dealing with them, you didn't make everybody
happy. But I'm not sure we made anybody extremely
mad at us on the thing. We hoped that we could say,
although you don't meet what we consider the
proper requirements, there are certain things
you can do. And at that time, we had the summer
provisional program, as you may recall. And it
gave us an out, in a sense. And I say an out. It gave
the student another way to prove that they had
ability, the determination, whatever it may take
to come in and be successful at Texas A&M. And
therefore we never quote denied anybody the right
to come to Texas A&M in that sense. We said right now
you don't meet the requirements. If you want to
come to the summer provisional program you can
come and meet the requirements of the provisional
program and then you can enter on in in the fall.
Could anybody go in the summer? At that time
anybody could come in and enter the summer too. Now
I'm realizing that It was impossible for some to
come because of work situations and distance and
other things, but otherwise the program was open
to anybody who wanted to come. What did it take in
the summer, what courses and grades, to survive
for the fall?
I want to say at that time that it took 12 hours and a
2.5 average or I believe. Were there any courses
that had to be included? Early on, I don't think
there were. We did go to where we had to because we
found that a lot of students were, some were taking
it very difficult. Some advisors, let me put it
this way, would assign a very difficult program
for some, and some of them would provide, give them
some what we considered easier courses, and they
didn't think it was really fair to the students,
nor did it give you the basis on which they might be
successful. Early on, when I say early on, in 71
when I went there, I think they could take any 12
hours. It takes six hours a summer school session
and had to, and I believe the figure, I don't know
whether it's the 2.5 or the 3. 3 sounds a little high
to me. I think it's a 2.5. And eventually,
maybe it's forgetful, but I think English and math
one of each was included eventually there were
some core courses that had to be and then there were
some others that could be added in from a select
group but we we got away from just a wide open
selection of courses so uh and as i recall about
half of the students who tried it in the summer made
it Then, of that half that survived in the summer,
what is your recollection of how well they did
toward graduation?
Again, I want to say about half of those made it on to
graduation. So they didn't do quite as well as
those that were fully admitted to begin with? I
don't think they did quite as well, but a lot of them
came through that route and did graduate.
And it was hard to tell because some of those who
didn't make it then eventually may have come back
as transfer students too.
In those early days was there any particular
geographic pattern to our enrollment sources?
Where did the students come from? Well I think
for the most part They came from the larger
metropolitan areas, there were just more
students there. But there were, again, at one time
I can remember, seemed like maybe two or three
counties didn't have anybody from it. But most
counties in the state of Texas would have one, two,
three, or more students come from there. They were
occasionally, they were, there were always a
certain few, I'm not sure how many people lived in
the county, but there were, It did pretty well
spread all over the state, but again, you had more
students coming from Harris County, Bexar
County, and Dallas and Tarrant Counties. Don't I
remember Harris maybe 20-25% of the student body?
Probably so. Harris was the biggest. It always
showed up in the figures that you had a lot from
Brazos County. But I think that's because a lot of
them listed this as their home. Therefore, it
showed up at more students here. There just
weren't that many students to come from Bassett
County, although it was maybe third or fourth in
numbers as far as total enrollment was concerned.
All right. Still on admissions, y'all would get
these applications. And as far as you recall,
early on, what was the turnaround time in
notification? Do you remember in those pre-
Computer days? I don't remember. It wasn't very
good, I'm sure, though. The time we got them in, got
the things together and everything, I don't
remember the procedure we used as far as getting
the information back to them, whether it had been
admitted or not. But pretty slow as far as they were
concerned, I would imagine. Do you remember any
unusual situations where a student sent their
seventh semester transcript with their
application, but then when their eighth semester
official transcript came in, that it had changed?
Yeah, we had those occasions, and admission was
conditioned on the fact that they, well, let's
see, it was conditioned on the fact that they
graduated from high school, so we had to, not only
did we have to verify that they had the proper
information based on seven and then we did it was
based on seven semesters uh we had to go back then
and get a report from the high school showing that
they did graduate and we had a look you know some
that didn't that were admitted but didn't
graduate and therefore they were not eligible to
come on the thing i don't recall I don't know that we
even checked to see if they maintained a class
rank. I think if they were admitted based on being
in the top half, if they dropped to the third
quarter, I don't think we paid any attention to it
at that time. But we did pay it too close to the fact
that they were a high school graduate because that
was part of the admission requirement. And that
was a real problem trying to get information in
from counselors, schools, between June and
middle of August when they started coming for
their summer conferences. All right, now Ed
Cooper would replace Mr. Heaton. Right, Ed
replaced Mr. Heaton when he retired. In the early
70s. In 73 possibly, something like that. All
right, describe Ed then as the Dean of Admissions
and Records. What was his normal work style and so
forth?
I enjoyed working with Ed. I never did work before
Ed. I worked with him. Of course, having been a
classmate of Ed, we had known each other for years
on the thing. Ed was the dean and he coordinated the
work of the admissions and the registrar. And
although I can't speak for Bob, It was an excellent
person to work for in the sense that he assumed I
knew what I was supposed to do, and he let me do it.